v0.45 Changelog: Internal changes + Documentation + Bug fixes (#9430)
PennyLaneAI/pennylane: doc/releases/changelog-0.45.0.md

Reviewer: Just noting the positioning of the PR link - could be moved.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Removed automatic unpacking of inner product resources in the resource representation of
```

  The following classes have been ported over:

>   - **REVERTED**`qp.BasisRotation` [(#9026)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/9026) [(#9252)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/9252)

Reviewer: This probably needs to be updated, or at least reformatted.

> * Decomposition rules have been re-written in a ``qjit`` compatible way so that they can be lowered to Catalyst/MLIR. Rules for the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Decomposition rules have been re-written for ``qjit`` compatibility, so that they can be lowered to Catalyst/MLIR. Rules for the
```

* A typo in the docstring for ``ControlledOp`` was fixed and the ``Controlled`` docstring recommends using ``ctrl`` instead.
  [(#7154)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/7154)

* Wide-spread changes have been made to our documentation to recommend using program capture with ``qjit``
  only, and enabling it via ``qjit(capture=True)`` instead of the global toggle (``qp.capture.enable()``).
  [(#9059)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/9059)

* A note has been added to the documentation of :func:`~.estimator.estimate.estimate` to clarify
  that an error will be raised if a ``ResourceOperator`` is encountered that does not have
  a resource decomposition defined and it is not in the provided ``gate_set``.
  [(#9230)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/9230)

> * The documentation of :func:~.shadow_expval measurement has been refined to clarify the role of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The documentation of the :func:`~.shadow_expval` measurement has been refined to clarify the role of the
```

  ```

>   * **REVERTED** `qp.BasisRotation` has been ported to be a ``Subroutine``.

Reviewer: Considering removing this entry altogether 🤔

Reviewer: Actually, let's keep it, but:
```suggestion
  * qp.BasisRotation` was initially ported to be a ``Subroutine``, but this change was reverted.
```

* Internal calls to the ``decompose`` transform have been updated to provide a ``target_gates`` argument so that
  they are compatible with the new graph-based decomposition system.
  [(#8939)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/8939)

* A ``qp.decomposition.toggle_graph_ctx`` context manager has been added to temporarily enable or disable graph-based
  decompositions in a thread-safe way. The fixtures ``"enable_graph_decomposition"``, ``"disable_graph_decomposition"``,
  and ``"enable_and_disable_graph_decomp"`` have been updated to use this method so that they are thread-safe.
  [(#8966)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/8966)

* Specialized gate kernels have been added for ``RX``, ``RY``, ``RZ``, and ``Hadamard`` in the ``default.qubit`` device.
  These bypass generic einsum/tensordot dispatches and use direct contractions for NumPy
  states, with correct fallbacks for autodiff interfaces (Autograd, Torch, JAX).
  [(#9075)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/9075)

<h3>Documentation 📝</h3>

* The README has been updated to better introduce PennyLane.
  [(#9370)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/9370)

> * TensorFlow related documentation has been updated to clarify that maintenance support has been dropped since

Reviewer: Just an ordering suggestion - the most important documentation entries are the README, `qml->qp`, the AI policy document, and the `transforms` module changes. I think those would be best at the top of this section.

> * Updated the README to better introduce PennyLane.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The README has been updated to better introduce PennyLane.
```

  [(#9370)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/9370)

> * Updated TensorFlow related documentation to clarify that maintenance support has been dropped since

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* TensorFlow related documentation has been updated to clarify that maintenance support has been dropped since
```

  [(#9397)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/9397)

* Docstrings for several optimization transforms have been improved by showing the drawing of the circuit
  after the transform has been applied as opposed to just the numeric simulation result. The improved
  transform docstrings include ``cancel_inverses``, ``commute_controlled``, ``merge_amplitude_embedding``, ``merge_rotations``, ``pattern_matching_optimization``, ``remove_barrier``, ``single_qubit_fusion``, and ``undo_swaps``.
  [(#9381)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/9381)

* A new AI policy document is now applied across the PennyLaneAI organization for all AI contributions.
  [(#9079)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/9079)

* The :mod:`pennylane.transforms` module has been reorganized to allow for easier indexing through available transforms in PennyLane.
  [(#9130)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/9130)

> * The docstring for :func:`~.transforms.cancel_inverses`, :func:`~.transforms.merge_rotations`,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The docstrings for :func:`~.transforms.cancel_inverses`, :func:`~.transforms.merge_rotations`,
```

>   and :func:`~transforms.combine_global_phases` now has a "Usage with qjit" section

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  and :func:`~.transforms.combine_global_phases` now has a "Usage with qjit" section
```

* Fixed a bug where the graph-based decomposition system is unbale to find a decomposition for a `ControlledQubitUnitary` with more than two target wires.
  [(#9036)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/9036)

* Fixed a discontinuity in the gradient of the single-qubit unitary decompositions.
  [(#9036)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/9036)

* Fixed a `MemoryError` in `default.clifford` when preparing a :class:`~.BasisState` with a large number of wires.
  [(#9018)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/9018)

* Fixed a bug where a controlled `ChangeOpBasis` is sometimes not decomposed optimally when graph is enabled.
  [(#9161)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/9161)

* Fixed a bug where the decomposition graph is unable to find trivial decompositions of `qp.X(0) ** 1` and `qp.X(0) ** 0`.
  [(#9152)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/9152)

* Fixed various small bugs within :mod:`pennylane.estimator`, including:
  [(#9194)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/9194)

    - The resource decompositions for `~.estimator.QubitUnitary` and `~.estimator.OutMultiplier` so
      that they match the results from literature

>     - Incorrect wire mapping when converting `~.QuantumPhaseEstimation` to `~.estimator.QPE`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - The resource decompositions for ``estimator.QubitUnitary`` and ``estimator.OutMultiplier`` so
      that they match the results from literature
    - Incorrect wire mapping when converting ``QuantumPhaseEstimation`` to ``estimator.QPE``
```

>     - Added support for mapping `~.Barrier` and `~.SnapShot` to `~.labs.estimator_beta.Identity`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Added support for mapping ``Barrier`` and ``SnapShot`` to ``estimator.Identity``
```

* A typo in the docstring for ``ControlledOp`` was fixed and the ``Controlled`` docstring recommends using ``ctrl`` instead.
  [(#7154)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/7154)

> * Wide-spread changes have been made to our documentation to recommend using program capture with ``qjit``

Reviewer: Would also move this one a bit higher up.

  only, and enabling it via ``qjit(capture=True)`` instead of the global toggle (``qp.capture.enable()``).
  [(#9059)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/9059)

* A note has been added to the documentation of :func:`~.estimator.estimate.estimate` to clarify
  that an error will be raised if a ``ResourceOperator`` is encountered that does not have
  a resource decomposition defined and it is not in the provided ``gate_set``.
  [(#9230)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/9230)

* The documentation of the :func:`~.shadow_expval` measurement has been refined to clarify the role of the
  ``seed`` keyword argument and include instructions for achieving reproducible results with this argument.
  [(#9216)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/9216)

> * The definition of the ``pipeline`` argument for :func:`~.transforms.compile` was clarified in its documentation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The definition of the ``pipeline`` argument for :func:`~.compile` was clarified in its documentation.
```

  [(#9159)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/9159)

* A typo in the type of a parameter in the docstring of :class:`~.templates.layers.BasicEntanglerLayers` has been fixed.
  [(#9046)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/9046)

* Infrastructure has been put in place for features that should be accessible from both PennyLane and
  Catalyst to have a single source of truth for documentation, which will provide a better overall
  experience when consulting our documentation.
  [(#9020)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/9020)

>   The process for Catalyst frontend features to be automatically accessible from PennyLane, while

Reviewer: Is this part of the above entry or a new one? And should we be including a link to a Catalyst PR?

Author: Yes, I believe this is additional context for the entry of PR #9020 

>And should we be including a link to a Catalyst PR
do you mean whether this PR reference should be excluded?

[(#2409)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/2409)

* Fixed a typo in the documentation for `qre.SelectPauli`.
  [(#9373)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/9373)

* Broken documentation links to external demos and tutorials have been fixed by replacing hardcoded URLs
  with proper ``:doc:`` cross references.
  [(#9356)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/9356)

> * Made description of numpy array slicing used to get the subspace of a density matrix more clear in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The description of NumPy array slicing used to get the subspace of a density matrix is now more clear in
```

  is the identity. Instead, a `PauliRot` is always produced, which in this case decomposes to a `GlobalPhase`.
  [(#9001)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/9001)

> * Fixed a bug where the graph-based decomposition system is unable to find a decomposition for a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixed a bug where the graph-based decomposition system was unable to find a decomposition for a
```

  `ControlledQubitUnitary` with more than two target wires.
  [(#9036)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/9036)

* Fixed a discontinuity in the gradient of the single-qubit unitary decompositions.
  [(#9036)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/9036)

* Fixed a `MemoryError` in `default.clifford` when preparing a :class:`~.BasisState` with a large number of wires.
  [(#9018)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/9018)

> * Fixed a bug where a controlled `ChangeOpBasis` is sometimes not decomposed optimally when the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixed a bug where a controlled `ChangeOpBasis` was sometimes decomposed inefficiently when the
```

  graph-based system is enabled.
  [(#9161)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/9161)

> * Fixed a bug where the decomposition graph is unable to find trivial decompositions of `qp.X(0) ** 1` and `qp.X(0) ** 0`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixed a bug where the decomposition graph was unable to find trivial decompositions of `qp.X(0) ** 1` and `qp.X(0) ** 0`.
```
